Components of Databases:
There are 11 components of a Database
1) Software: A set of programs used to control the entire database. It consists of DBMS software, Operating Systems, Network Software which
are used to share the data among the users and the application software is used to access the data in the Database.
2) Hardware: These are the physical electronic components of the Database like i/o devices, computers, storage devices etc. It acts as an
interface between the users and the computer.
3) Data: Data is the most important component of the Databases. DBMS is used to collect, store, process and access the data whenever 
needed. DBMS consists of actual, operational and metadata. 
4) Procedures: These are the step by step instructions given on how to use DBMS and for designing and running the DBMS. There are
documented instructions which are to be followed by the users while using DBMS.
5) Database Access Language: It is a certain language which is understood by the DBMS to access, retrieve, change and save the data. The
data can be accessed by using certain commands which are understood by the computer and the output comes in such a format that is easy 
to understand by the user. 
6) Query Processor: It basically processes the queries in a low level language which is understood by the DBMS and after receiving the 
results it again changes the low level language to high level human understandable language. 
7) Runtime Database Manager: It is usually known as Database Control System. It handles database access at the run time and acts as an 
interface between the user- programs and the queries. It's use it to convert the operations into user queries and helps to maintain the
consistency, integrity and security of the data. 
8) Data Manager: It is alsow known as Cache Manager. It manages and provides the data after the crisis i.e helps in recovery after the 
system's failure.
9) Database Engine: It's main work is to store, process and secure the data. Helps the Database to retrieve the data faster and in a 
controlled way for the most demanding data applications. It is mostly used as a relational database for processing the online transactions.
10) Data Dictionary: It is a reserved space in the database to store information about the database. The information stored in the data
dictionary can be only read and is in the form of tables and views. 
11) Report Writer: It is also called as report generator. It extracts the information from one or more files and generates a report. The
report can be in the form of rows and columns, charts and texts. 
